TECHNIQUE

When programming, bug concerning memory issue is a usual case. Thus, it is 
necessary to get familiar about different approaches when debugging for
memory issues like memory leak, double free, etc.

During the practice in comp40, according to the advice from Professor 
Mendelson, we found it is a very efficient way to print the pointer or the
address of the variables for debugging.

Here are two examples we experienced when using this technique to find the bug
with memory issues. 

First, we have some memory leak in the program. Though, through valgrind, we
find which part of the code may cause the memory leak. But, we cannot find
the reason causing the memory leak. Thus, we test the result with a very simple
testing files and print all the pointers when they are allocated with memory 
and when their memory is freed. Through checking the address of these memory,
we found that some memory is not freed during the program, and we find the 
reason causing the memory leak in the code. Thus, we edit the code and the
program never caused memory leak in the future testing.


Second, our program will cause double free memory every time when removing the
blackedge pixels. And it was very hard for us to find where the bug was.
Through printing flags in the program, through we could find which function 
might have bugs, we could't find the reason to cause the double memory. Thus,
we print the pointers every time when allocating the memory and freeing the 
memory with small test case. 

We found that all the memory which were allocated to store the information for
the pixels at the edge of the image was freed two times. Thus, we guessed that
the pointers pointing to the memory for the pixels at the edge of the image
might be pushed into the sequence two times. Thus, we checked the code for
pushing the pointers of the pixels at the edge of the images into the sequence 
and we found that all these pointers were pushed into the sequence two times in
fact. Thus, finally, we solved this issue.

According to the experience of these two times of the homework, we believed 
that printing the pointers would be a very good choise when got stucked during
the debug with memory issues.